  1
                            And Nobody Came


I might as well tell you what this book is about.

Years ago I started to write a memoir about a young fellow who wanted to
be a book dealer and how he made out. I tore it up when I discovered the
subject had already been covered by a humorist named Will Cuppy in a
book called, _How to Become Extinct_.

Now I’m not so sure. I’m still around in my middle-aged obsolescence and
all about us the young are withering on the vine. Civilization may beat
me yet in achieving the state of the dodo. The tragedy is that so few
seem to know or really believe it. Maybe there just isn’t enough
innocence left to join with the howl of the stricken book dealer upon
barging into the trap. Not just a howl of self-pity, but the yap of the
human spirit determined to assert itself no matter what. There’s some
juice in that spirit yet, or there would be no point in submitting the
following pages as supporting evidence—hopefully, or bitterly, or both.

Let there be no doubt about my original qualifications for the role of
Candide. With three hundred dollars worth of books (barely enough to
fill five shelves), a used record player, and some old recordings (left
in my apartment when I went into the army and still there upon my
return), I opened the Seven Stairs Book and Record Shop on the Near
North Side of Chicago.

The shop was located in one of the old brownstone, converted residences
still remaining on Rush Street—a fashionable townhouse district in the
era after the Great Chicago Fire, now the kind of a district into which
fashionable townhouses inevitably decline. One had to climb a short
flight of stairs above an English basement (I thought there were seven
steps—in reality there were eight), pass through a short, dark hall, and
unlock a door with a dime store skeleton key before entering finally
into the prospective shop. It was mid-August of 1946 when I first stood
there in the barren room. The sun had beaten in all day and I gasped for
air; and gasping, I stood wondering if this was to be the beginning of a
new life and an end to the hit-or-miss of neither success nor failure
that summed up my career to the moment.

It all fitted my mood perfectly: the holes in the plaster, the ripped
molding, the 1890 light fixture that hung by blackened chains from the
ceiling, the wood-burning fireplace, the worn floor, the general air of
decay lurking in every corner. Long before the scene registered fully
upon my mind, it had entered into my emotions. I saw everything and
forgave everything. It could all be repaired, painted, cleaned—set right
with a little work. I saw the little room filled with books and records,
a fire going, and myself in a velvet jacket, seated behind a desk, being
charming and gracious to everyone who came in.

I saw success, excitement, adventure, in the world I loved—the world of
books and music. I saw fine people coming and going—beautiful women and
handsome men. I saw myself surrounded by warmth, friendship and good
feeling, playing my favorite recordings all day, telling my favorite
stories, finding myself.

I ran my fingers over the mantelpiece. “I want this room,” I said to
myself. “I want it.”

I built shelves to the ceiling and bought all the books I could buy.
There was no money left to buy the velvet jacket. Every morning I opened
the store bright and early. Every night I closed very late. And no one
came to visit me. Morning, noon, and night it was the same. I was alone
with my books and my music. Everything was so bright, so shiny, so
clean. And the books! There were not very many, but they were all so
good! Still nobody came.

How do you go about getting people to buy books? I didn’t know. I had
been a teacher before the war. My father was not a business man either,
nor his father. No one in my family knew anything about business. I knew
the very least.

Every morning I walked into the shop freshly determined: today I will
sell a book! I hurried with my housekeeping. And then, what to do? Phone
a friend or a relative. I couldn’t think of a relative who read or a
friend who wouldn’t see through the thin disguise of my casual greeting
and understand the ulterior purpose of my call.

One late afternoon it happened. One of the beautiful people I had
dreamed about _came in_.

She stood on the threshold, apparently debating whether it was safe to
venture further. “Is this a bookstore?” she said.

“Please come in,” I said. “It’s a bookshop.”

She was solidly built and had a round face above a heavy neck with the
fat comfortably overlapping the collar of her white dress. Her legs were
sturdy, her feet were spread in a firm stance, she was fat and strong
and daring.

“Do you have a copy of _Peace of Mind_?” said my daring first customer.

Everyone was reading the rabbi’s book that summer—except me. It was a
bestseller; naturally I wouldn’t touch it. But here was a customer!

“Lady,” I said, opening my business career on a note of total
capitulation, “if you’ll wait here a moment, I’ll get the book for you.”
She nodded.

“Please,” I added, running out the door.

I sprinted four blocks to A. C. McClurg’s, the wholesaler from whom I
bought my original three hundred dollars’ worth of books, and bought a
single copy of _Peace of Mind_ for $1.62. Then I ran back to complete my
first sale for $2.50.

The realization overwhelmed me that I was totally unprepared to sell a
book. I had no bags or wrapping paper. I had no cash register or even a
cigar box. It seemed highly improper to accept money and then reach into
my pocket for change. It was a long time, in fact, before I could get
over the embarrassment of taking anyone’s money at all. I found it very
upsetting.
